# Cryo-EM map post-processing metrics
This repository accompanies the work: “A curated dataset for cryo-EM map post-processing”. It provides a standardized dataset for evaluating cryo-EM map post-processing methods. The dataset includes half-maps, average maps, atomic models, and post-processed maps generated using different approaches, including Deep Learning methods. 

Precomputed metrics (Phenix and Q-scores) are also included, along with a unified workflow and all scripts required for metric computation, enabling researchers to evaluate their own methods under consistent conditions.



## Dataset access (Harvard Dataverse)
The full dataset described in this work is publicly available on Harvard Dataverse across two separate deposits. Together, these repositories contain all maps, models, metadata, and precomputed metrics:
- [Dataverse 1](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/curated_dataset_cryoEM_map_postprocessing_info)
- [Dataverse 2](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/curated_dataset_cryoEM_postprocessing_methods_metrics)

Additionally, the following DOI corresponds to the informational dataset, which details the organization and content of each dataset, provides complementary notes, and includes links to each dataset across the two Dataverse deposits listed above. Please refer to the description section of this dataset for full details: [10.7910/DVN/YI79GU](https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/YI79GU)


## Data Organization
This work is structured around three main directories, each serving a specific purpose within the dataset and evaluation workflow:

### 1. Core dataset → *`root_directory`*
This folder contains all primary data used, including:
- Raw and post-processed maps (average maps, half-maps, and maps generated by all post-processing methods).
- Atomic models (pdb).
- Metadata JSON files, one per entry, describing voxel size, nominal resolution, and other relevant information.

This directory forms the central resource from which all evaluations and comparisons are derived. 

<pre> 
├── root_directory/
    ├── average_maps/
    ├── half_maps/
    ├── cryoten_maps/
    ├── emr_maps/
    ├── emr2_maps/
    ├── dem1_maps/
    ├── locscale/
    ├── locscale-/
    ├── locspiral/
    ├── pdbs/
    └── info/        # metadata for each entry
</pre>

#### 1.1. Naming conventions
To ensure the evaluation scripts work correctly, all maps must follow consistent naming rules within each folder. Below is the expected structure and example formats:

<pre>
root_directory/
├── average_maps/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_full.mrc
├── half_maps/
│   ├── <EMDB_ID>_half1.mrc
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_half2.mrc
├── cryoten_maps/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_full_cryoten.mrc
├── emr_maps/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_full_emr.mrc
├── emr2_maps/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_full_emr2.mrc
├── dem1_maps/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_full_dem1.mrc
├── locscale/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_locscale.mrc
├── locscale-/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_locscale-.mrc
├── locspiral/
│   └── <EMDB_ID>_locspiral.mrc
├── pdbs/
│   └── <pdb_number>.pdb
└── info/
    └── <EMDB_ID>.json
</pre>


**Important note regarding method naming:**

In this repository and in the associated Harvard Dataverse deposits, the following folder and method names are used:

- **`dem1`** → DeepEMhancer outputs
- **`locscale-`** → LocScale- outputs

However, in the associated publication, these methods are referred to using simplified notation: 

- *`dem1`* is denoted as **`dem`** in the paper
- *`locscale-`* is denoted as **`locscale*`** in the paper

This difference is purely notational and does not reflect any change in methodology or data content. All results reported in the paper corresponding to **`dem`** and **`locscale*`** directly map to the *`dem1`* and *`locscale-`* folders provided in this repository and in the Dataverse datasets. 


**Rules and guidelines**

1. General rule: use *`<EMDB_ID>`* as the base filename for all maps and metadata files (average maps, half-maps, and post-processed maps), except for PDB files, which use the PDB number (e.g., 6giq.pdb).

2. File extensions must match the type:

   - .mrc for maps
   - .pdb for atomic models
   - .json for metadata files

3. Post-processed maps should include the method name as a suffix:

   - CryoTEN, EMReady, EMReady2, DeepEMhancer: *`<EMDB_ID>_full_method.mrc`* (e.g., EMD-0004_full_cryoten.mrc).
   - LocScale, LocScale-, LocSpiral: *`<EMDB_ID>_method.mrc`* (e.g., EMD-0004_locscale.mrc).

4. All files must reside in the proper folder as shown above; the scripts automatically use this structure to locate and match files.

Following these conventions ensures *`maps_metrics_files.py`* and other scripts can correctly pair maps with models and metadata, enabling reproducible metric computation.



### 2. Evaluation workflow and scripts → *`code_py_path`*
All Python scripts used to generate post-processing maps, compute evaluation metrics, reproduce the workflow, and visualize results are located here. This directory includes:
- The **train/validation/test split JSON**, defining the non-overlapping subsets used for benchmarking. 
- The full **metric computation pipeline**, including post-processing map generation, metric calculation, extraction, statistical visualization (boxplots and summary statistics), and per-residue Q-score plotting.
  
Researchers can reuse these scripts to evaluate their own methods under the same conditions.

<pre>
├── code_py_path/
    ├── maps_metrics_files.py                	# python script for metric computation
    ├── parser_def.py                        	# aggregate metrics into a CSV file
	├── box_plot_stats.py					 	# generates boxplots and summary statistics
	├── qscore_residue.py					 	# generates per-residue qscore plots
	├── locscale_corrected.py				 	# auxiliary file to obtain locscale- maps  
	├── locspiral.py						 	# auxiliary file to obtain locspiral maps
    ├── sept2024_train_val_test_split.json   	# JSON file defining dataset split 
	├── train_val_test_split_emready.ods	 	# EMReady split
	├── dataset_cryoten.csv					 	# cryoTEN split
    └── routes.txt   						 	# defined routes
</pre>


### 3. Computed metrics → *`output_directory`*
This directory stores all results generated during the evaluation:
- **Phenix-derived metrics** (map-model agreement and global quality metrics).
- **Q-score results** (global and per-residue scores).

To keep the main output directory clean and easy to navigate, all auxiliary files obtained internally during metric computation, such as intermediate Phenix outputs, temporary maps, or model-map alignment files, are stored separately in ***`extra_directory`***.

<pre>
├── output_directory/
│   ├── phenix_metrics            			# Phenix-derived evaluation metrics
│   └── qscore_metrics            			# Q-score results
├── extra_directory/
│   ├── phenix_intermediates
│   └── qscore_intermediates
├── all_metrics_test_paper.csv    			# CSV containing the metrics
└── stats_complete_non_matches.json    		# JSON file containing all statistics 
	

</pre>

To further organize auxiliary outputs, the *`extra_directory`* follows a structured layout based on different stages of the metric computation workflow:

- A subdirectory storing intermediate files generated by **`Phenix.mtriage`** (`mtriage_outputs`).
- Subdirectories containing auxiliary outputs from **`Phenix.emringer`**, inlcuding both result files (`emringer_outputs`) and automatically generated plots (`emringer_plots_extra`).
- A subdirectory with auxiliary files produced during **MapQ execution**, such as per-residue Q-score text outputs (`qscores_extra`).

Additionally, the auxiliary files created by **`phenix.real_space_refine`** (e.g., refined models and temporary alignment files) are stored directly in *`extra_directory`*, without further subfolder organization.

This organization reflects the sequential processing steps of the evaluation pipeline and facilitates traceability while keeping final metric outputs separate from intermediate data.

<pre>
	extra_directory
	├── emringer_outputs/
	├── emringer_plots_extra/
	├── mtriage_outputs/
	├── qscores_extra/
	└── refined_models_aux_files
</pre>


## Installation and environment setup

To ensure reproducibility of the evaluation workflow, we provide a Conda environment file (*`environment.yml`*) containing all required Python dependencies. 

### 1. Create the Conda environment
From the root of this repository, run:
<pre>
	conda env create -f environment.yml
</pre>

### 2. Activate the environment
<pre>
	conda activate scipion3
</pre>

### 3. External software dependencies

In addition to the Python environment, this workflow requires external software tools:

 - **Phenix** (for map-model metrics computation).
 - **MapQ** (for Q-score computation).
 - Optional: post-processing methods for generating new maps (CryoTEN, EMReady, EMReady2, DeepEMhancer, LocScale, LocScale-, LocSpiral).

Detailed step-by-step installation instructions for all these components are provided in `/docs/Installation Guide.pdf`

**Note:** users who only intend to compute metrics using the post-processed maps already included in the dataset do not need to install the post-processing methods, but Phenix and MapQ are always required. 


## Metric Computation Script
*`maps_metrics_files.py`*

The ***`maps_metrics_files.py`*** script, located in `/code_py_path/`, computes Phenix and Q-scores metrics for all test maps of a selected post-processing method.
Below you will find installation requirements, folder organization requirements, explanation of the command-line arguments, and instructions for execution.

### 1. Requirements and installation instructions
**Phenix installation**

This script relies on Phenix tools for map-model assessment. Before running the script:
1. Install Phenix following the instructions in the PDF included in this repository (see *Section 1.Phenix installation in /docs/Installation Guide.pdf*).
2. Activate Phenix in the same terminal where the script will be executed: *`load_phenix`*

Failure to activate Phenix will result in missing-command errors.

**MapQ installation**

This script requires MapQ for the computation of Q-scores, which provide global and per-residue metrics for cryo-EM maps. Before running the script, install MapQ following the instructions provided in the PDF included in this repository (see *Section 2. MapQ installation (for Q-score computation) in /docs/Installation Guide.pdf*).


### 2. Supported methods
The script supports the following post-processing methods:

- CryoTEN
- EMReady (emr)
- EMReady2 (emr2)
- DeepEMhancer (dem1)
- LocScale
- LocScale-
- LocSpiral

These methods correspond to the post-processing approaches evaluated in the associated publication. Brief installation instructions are detailed in *Section 3.Installation of post-processing methods in `/docs/Installation Guide.pdf.`* 

**Note on naming:** In this repository and Dataverse, DeepEMhancer results are stored under *`dem1`*, and LocScale- results under *`locscale-`*. In the paper, these methods are referred to as *`dem`* and *`locscale`** respectively. Both notations correspond to the same data and methods. 

**Note:** This repository does not include the software for these methods. In order to generate new post-processed maps, you must first install each method on your system. Once installed, the script will automatically run the method selected and generate the corresponding post-processed maps, following the expected folder structure (see the *Dataset Organization* section). 

**Important:** All post-processed maps needed to compute metrics are already generated and included in our dataset. Therefore, if your goal is only to compute metrics, no additional software installation is required.

	
### 3. Expected folder organization
Before running the script, your directory tree must follow the structure described in the *Dataset Organization* section.

<pre>
├── root_directory/
    ├── average_maps/
    ├── half_maps/
    ├── cryoten_maps/
    ├── emr_maps/
    ├── emr2_maps/
    ├── dem1_maps/
    ├── locscale/
    ├── locscale-/
    ├── locspiral/
    ├── info/
    └── pdbs/
</pre>

Each entry must follow the naming conventions described earlier, and the metadata JSON file (under `root_directory/info/`) and the corresponding PDB file must be available in their designated locations within the directory structure. 

**About routes.txt**

The file *`routes.txt`* contains the absolute paths to all required directories, including the dataset root folder, the subfolders for each-post-processing method, the dataset split JSON file, and the output directory used during metric computation.

Since directory structures vary across systems, you must edit this file and replace the example paths with the correct locations on your machine.

If the paths in *`routes.txt`* are incorrect or incomplete, the script will not be able to locate the maps or metadata and will terminate with missing-paths errors.


### 4. Running the script
The *`maps_metrics_files.py`* script accepts several flags that control the metric computation workflow. 
Below you can find a description of all available flags.

**Required flags:**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`-m`| Type of map to process. Must be one of the predefined dataset folders: <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - `average_maps`, `locscale`, `locscale-`, `locspiral`, `dem1`, `emr`, `emr2`, `cryoten`. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - `all` → to compute metrics for all available methods. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - `other` → to compute metrics for custom/unlisted methods. The path of the custom maps (*`output_directory_other`*) must be added in the file: *`routes.txt`*. |
|`-p`| Path to the directory containing the file with all dataset paths (*`routes.txt`*).|


**Optional flags**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`--refine`| If enabled, the script performs refinement prior to metric computation: <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - phenix.real_space_refine. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - phenix.mtriage and phenix.emringer. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - MapQ (Q-score calculation). <br><br> If disabled, metric computation is performed on the input model before refinement: <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - phenix.mtriage and phenix.emringer. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - MapQ (Q-score calculation). <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - phenix.real_space_refine.|
|`-n`| Limits the number of maps to process. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - If not provided: all maps selected in the selected category (`-m`) are processed. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - If set: only the first `n` entries are processed.|
|`-nw`| Number of workers (parallel processes) used for metric computation. Default: 5.|


**Important:** when running the script in `not refine` mode (`refine = False`), `-nw` must be set to 1.

**Example of use:**
- Refine:
<pre>
python maps_metrics_files.py -m emr2 --refine -nw 6 -p /path/to/routes.txt
</pre>

- Not refine:
<pre>
  python maps_metrics_files.py -m emr2 -nw 1 -p /path/to/routes.txt
</pre>

### 5. Choosing the dataset split
The evaluation pipeline relies on a JSON file that defines the dataset partitions (train, val, and test). The path to this JSON file must be specified inside *`routes.txt`*, using the entry:

<pre>
json_file_path = /path/to/sep2024_train_val_test_split.json
</pre>

This JSON file contains the list of maps included in each split, and the script *`maps_metrics_files.py`*, by default, uses the test partition to compute the Phenix and Q-score metrics.

If you wish to compute metrics for additional maps —such as training or validation maps, or any custom subset— you may either:
- add those maps to the existing partitions in the JSON file.
- create a new key (e.g., “custom”), containing the names of the desired maps.

In either case, you must update the line in *`maps_metrics_files.py`* where the selected partition is loaded. Inside the script, you will find a clearly marked comment indicating where the selection occurs:

<pre>
# >>> USER: change 'test' here if you want to process a different split
</pre>

### 6. Important execution notes

**Interruptions and incomplete metric files**

If the script is interrupted before a metric finishes computing, the output file may be created but remain incomplete. Since the script checks whether a metric file already exists, incomplete files will not be overwritten. 

In addition, the auxiliary file generated by `phenix.real_space_refine` should only be deleted when an interruption has occurred and the metric file is incomplete. If it is not removed, rerunning the script will prevent the metrics from being generated. In this situation, both the incomplete output file and its auxiliary file must be removed before rerunning the script.


## CSV generation script
*`parser_def.py`*

The *`parser_def.py`* script, located in `/code_py_path/`, is responsible for consolidating all metrics computed by *`maps_metrics_files.py`* into a single CSV file. It collects metric files from the corresponding *`output_directory`* and combines them into a structurable table for easier analysis and comparison.

### Running the script

It accepts the following command-line arguments.

**Required flags:**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`-o`| Name of the CSV file to generate (do not include the .csv extension).|
|`-p`| Path to the directory containing the file with all dataset paths (*`routes.txt`*).|


**Example of use:**

<pre>
python3 parser_def.py -o all_metrics_test_paper -p /path/to/routes.txt
</pre>
  
This will create a CSV file named `all_metrics_test_paper.csv` in the directory specified by *`output_folder_csv`* inside *`routes.txt`*. The resulting file will include all Phenix and Q-score metrics for the maps referenced in the JSON split file.



## Boxplot generation script
*`box_plot_stats.py`*

This script generates boxplots for all metrics contained in the CSV file produced by *`parser_def.py`*. It allows visual comparison of the performance of different post-processing methods across all available metrics, and provides statistical summaries (mean, median, and quartiles) for each method.

You can visualize the full test set or restrict the plots to `matches` or `non_matches`, depending on whether the maps belong to the training/validation partitions of CryoTEN and EMReady or not.

### Running the script

It accepts the following command-line arguments.

**Required flags:**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`--file_path`| Path to the CSV file containing all computed metrics.|
|`--output_dir`| Directory where the generated plots will be saved.|
|`--stats_file`| Path to the JSON file where summary statistics (mean, median, and quartiles) will be stored.|
|`--mode`| Metric filtering mode. Possible values are: <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - **all:** generate plots using the full test set (by default). <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - **matches:** only entries that appear in training or validation sets of CryoTEN and EMReady. <br>&nbsp;&nbsp; - **non_matches:** entries not included in the training or validation sets of CryoTEN and EMReady.|


**Note:** when using `matches` or `non_matches`, you will need to provide the CSV or ODS files defining the CryoTEN and EMReady partitions, as well as the JSON file defining the train/validation/test split used in this work. Specifically, the required files are `data_cryoten.csv` (CryoTEN partition), and `train_val_test_split_emready.ods`(EMReady partition), as described in the repository *Data Organization* section. 
Within the script, two clearly marked comments indicate where the paths to these files must be updated:

<pre>
# >>> USER: update the path to the CryoTEN and EMReady partition CSV files
# >>> USER: update the path to the JSON file defining the dataset splits
</pre>

**Example of use:**

<pre>
python3 box_plot_stats.py --file_path /path/to/all_metrics_test_paper.csv --output_dir /path/to/plots_dir/  --stats_file stats_complete_non_matches.json --mode non_matches
</pre>

**Additional notes:**

By default, the script generates boxplots for all post-processing methods present in the metrics CSV. If you want to exclude specific methods from the plots, this can be done directly in the script, without modifying the CSV file. Inside the script, you will find a clearly marked comment where the columns to be filtered are defined:

<pre>
# >>> USER: modify this list to exclude specific methods from the boxplots
</pre>

To exclude a method from the boxplots, simply add its identifier (e.g., locscale, locspiral, emr, etc) to the *`filtered_columns`* list. All metrics associated with the specified methods will be automatically removed from the plots and from the corresponding statistical summaries.

**Note:** *`filtered_columns`* must always be defined as a tuple. When excluding a single method, include a trailing comma (e.g.,("emr",)). Defining it as a string (e.g.,("emr")) will cause matching errors. When excluding multiple methods, list them as strings within the tuple (e.g., ("emr", "locspiral", "locscale")). Use an empty tuple () if no methods should be excluded.

In addition to the plots, the script outputs a JSON file containing summary statistics —including the mean, median, and first and third quartiles— for each metric and post-processing method.


## Per-residue Q-score analysis script
*`qscore_residue.py`*

The script *`qscore_residue.py`* is used to compute and visualize per-residue Q-score profiles for a single cryo-EM map. It generates a plot showing how Q-scores vary along the protein sequence, allowing local assessment of map-model agreement at the residue level.

The input `.txt` file used in this script is generated as part of the Q-score computation performed by MapQ in *`maps_metrics_files.py`* and is stored in the `qscores_extra` directory in *`extra_directory`*.

### Running the script
It accepts the following command-line arguments.

**Required flags:**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`archive`| Path to the input `.txt` file containing the per-residue Q-scores.|

**Optional flags:**

| Argument | Description | 
|-------|-----|
|`--output_dir`| Directory where the output plots will be saved (default: `./plots_metrics_residues/`).|
|`--not_refine`| If the flag is set, the string `not_refine` is added to the output plot filename. This is useful to distinguish plots generated from non-refined models.|


**Example of use:**

- Refine:

<pre>
python3 qscore_residue.py 
/path/to/extra_directory/qscores_extra/8a1d_cleaned_real_space_refined_000.pdb__Q__EMD-15072_full_cryoten.mrc_All.txt --output_dir /path/to/plots_metrics_residues/
</pre>

- Not refine:
<pre>
python3 qscore_residue.py 
/path/to/extra_directory/qscores_extra/8a1d.pdb__Q__EMD-15072_full_cryoten.mrc_All.txt --output_dir /path/to/plots_metrics_residues/ --not_refine
</pre>

These commands generate a per-residue Q-score plot for the selected map, saving it in the directory defined by *`--output_dir`*.

